This is not the time I bless myself to people who don't come from around here.
Well, actually, this is Greece.
This is Greece.
This is the peninsula of Chalcedis.
And here, the third leg of this peninsula is Mount Athos.
Mount Athos refers to the whole lake the whole peninsula actually the Mount Athos is this it's only this and that this is a huge rocky mountain 6,000 feet tall it's pretty tall pretty high but as a result of the presence of this mountain the whole peninsula is called the peninsula of Mount Athos okay this is what I do actually what I will do is this
Start from Uranúpolis, that is right here.
This is the imaginary boundaries of Mount Athos.
Anything beyond this point is out of limits for women.
And we start from Uranúpolis, go all the way down here to Daphne.
Then we go, we take the bus from here, we go up to Cariès here.
and from there we visit monasteries of this side actually Lavra, great Lavra that you have in mind is down here and I will explain how you'll be able to another monastery you want to see certainly is Eviron and that is within walking distance from Cariès Vatopedi is out of the way and I don't suggest going to Vatopedi because Vatopedi you have to double back to go to Vatopedi actually what is good for you is to go to Cariès
See certain things that I will indicate to you tonight and then go to Stavronikita.
You can do that on foot.
It takes about 40 minutes downhill.
That's first, right?
I beg your pardon?
You'd recommend I do that?
Yes, on foot to get a sense of the land and the landscape and then go down to Iviron from Stavronikita to Iviron to get a ride.
and if the weather is good spend the night at Iberon and if the weather is good and if boats are still running take a boat from Iberon right here and go all the way to Lavra if not try to get a ride to Lavra try to get so try to get a boat from Iberon to Lavra but I would suggest get a ride because you will see some
amazing land, amazing terrain, a ride, a bus or a truck ride, no matter how much they charge you do it.
Because that is unique.
And if you go to Lavra, there is something else.
So I would do that.
Now you say how much they charge.
Do they charge or do you give them something?
No, no, they charge you because they are privateers.
I mean, they're not, okay?
But we'll get to that after we go through the... Well, until very recently, until what, 10, 15 years ago, everything, all communications now that was done on boats like this.
This is a Trehandiri, that's what you call it, and this is actually
the development of boat building in Mediterranean since prehistoric times.
What makes that boat, what gives it its character?
The fact that it is virtually unsinkable.
It doesn't go down, provided that you have somebody that knows what he's doing, okay?
This is a fisherman's boat.
What are we, could you spell it for me?
T-R-E-H-A
T-R-E-H-A-N-T-I-R-Y.
I simply transliterate, that's all I do, it's Trefandir, okay?
Now, of course, as the time went on, this changed, and of course now, faster, iron boats,
taking the part of the boats I showed you before.
They're faster, but they're less romantic, they're less traditional, and I prefer the old boats.
However, you don't see them anymore.
Is it faster and more reliable?
Oh, yes.
Well, reliable, again, only God knows what reliable is.
And of course, all of them, they have names.
This is Hagia Anna.
This is a little... It's a location where Skites, small little houses where two or three monks lived together separately away from the big monasteries.
Okay?
There's a Skite.
By the way, if you have an opportunity, look at the book you bought tonight.
Now, we start going down the peninsula and then you see this...
slope and you realize that is a result of some volcanic activities and of course such activities are recorded in Greek mythology where Mount Athos is supposed to be one of the giants that fought against the Olympian gods and in fact Mount Athos attempted to molest virgin Athena and Poseidon or Zeus
depending upon the version of the story told, is a giant.
It's what existed before the Olympian gods took over.
And there Poseidon throws a huge rock on the top of the giant and the giant is killed and the name
of the giant who was Athos is given to the mountain that was a pretty rock actually but that symbolizes volcanic activities in the area okay as we go downhill now this is what you see when you're on the boat oh yes this is all I will see this going on on the boat yes more or less more or less yeah because we're on our way now to
On the way down.
Well, look at this.
That looks like Scandinavian little castle.
But it's not.
It's actually a house.
That is a house.
Monks got crowded even in huge monasteries.
And some of them asking for, looking for seclusion, went and built their own little houses.
These are called skites.
And they are two or three.
stay together and work together and pray together and die together in the end or well die separately yes they usually depend on a larger monastery they say this is a skiti of iberon this is skiti of lavora okay they usually sublet from the monastery
But it's like the 50 states in the United States.
The monastery is at 20.
When they divide their state, there in Mount Athosar is different.
Okay?
Yeah, that is a good parallelism.
You know, the United States and Mount Athosar.
So this would be like Massachusetts, but maybe that's Boston right there.
Well, not exactly.
Actually, what this will be is a county.
Okay.
A county is a bigger larger than that.
Now, as we...
go on you see beautiful formations of water and of rock formations some of the cleanest water in Mediterranean and I can guarantee that it's clear under the water because I've been diving there for the past 30 years I ought to know and these are actually make some stops
But this is a good example.
This is the arsanas.
What is an arsanas?
Actually, the word comes from an arsenal.
Originally, I checked Webster, it means a depot by the seafront where perishables are unloaded for the monastery.
This is the arsanas of the Bulgarian monastery of Zodrappu.
And the Bulgarians, being a land people, build a monastery, their monastery, in the mountains, away from the sea.
Something that Byzantines don't do.
All Byzantine monasteries of Mount Athos, all 17 of them, Greek monasteries, are built near to the sea, near the sea.
Is there something symbolic in that?
No, there were Greeks, they loved the sea, they knew how
Well actually here you have a package of three entities in one.
First of all we have the depot where the boats come and unload things and then monks take them into the monasteries and the backs of mules.
The other thing is a chapel, mount that is full of them because there that reminds you that this is a place of prayer.
chapel with crosses and that's incorporated into the structure and then you have a tower where is this it's a tower a watchtower it's a part of a greater network of early warning system against pirates if we place the beginning of Mount Athos somewhere in the seventh or eighth century that is something that is still disputed
9th and 10th century, the late 9th and beginning of 10th century is the time of piracy because the Byzantines lose Crete in the middle of 9th century and the Arabs, the Saracen Arabs really take over
And in the beginning of the 10th century they even sacked Thessaloniki.
904.
A man by the name of Leo of Tripolis comes and takes Thessaloniki and departs taking with him 22,000 young men and women.
Okay, it's an amazing story.
22,000 people.
Many of them died on the way back and takes them down to Crete and to Egypt and sells them as slaves.
Now, this is a warning tower, part of the warning system.
The moment they saw something, they sent smoke signals or fire at mine or bells or horsemen alerted the area and then if they had time, they would flee.
If they did not, they would lock the doors and this is a tower.
And no self-respecting pirate would waste any time trying to kill four or five people in the tower.
Because pirates had other things to do.
They grab everything they can and they take off before the Byzantine fleet appeared.
Well, the Byzantine fleet would appear only to verify the damages.
It was always late because you realized how difficult it was to communicate.
Now, this is a good example of Byzantine Monastery.
Most of these are built in the 10th century in the form you see in there, but this is the Monastery of the Chiariu, as you will see tomorrow, and there are many things to be said.
Well, let's jump one and then come back.
We're talking about
Huge walls, we're talking about fortifications, okay?
You can see this.
This is fortifications.
No windows, no openings at the base, okay?
Smaller, we go up.
That's a seven-story building.
That's impressive.
Now, right in the middle there is a church that is called the Catholicon.
And all around, there are huge walls.
And at the end, one corner, there's a huge tower.
that in this particular case was the last line of defense in case the pirates were able to scale the walls.
Did they have weapons to fight?
Oh, you bet.
I mean the monks.
Oh, definitely.
So they fought.
Oh, of course they did.
They were passive.
No, no, no, no.
They fought, my friend, and they fought well.
And especially we have, in fact, embattlements where one can see signs where the cannons were hinged.
Okay, they had cannons there.
So they were in an easy pushover.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
They would fight and... The fact that it's there a thousand years comes to something, doesn't it?
Definitely.
But let's go back.
Actually, wall all around.
Wall all around.
Is the chair comfortable?
Yes, ma'am.
Okay, I can bring something more comfortable if you like.
Okay.
Now, you see the...
That's the main church of the monastery.
The heart of their spiritual life.
Oh definitely, you cannot miss.
That is the case.
And you see many testimonies indicating that there was no central heating system.
Today they do have central heating systems.
They work using wood.
They burn wood.
Because they're afraid they might burn again.
And the funny thing, you see this?
Rooms sticking out?
Yes.
Doesn't it remind you what we saw in the Saloniki yesterday?
Well, it is a Turkish style.
The Turks took it from the Persians.
And this was built during periods where the increase of monks was so big that they could not shelter everybody in.
And being afraid to stay outside the masteries, they expanded the only way possible.
Okay?
They built like nests, they were built and they were still under the protection of the monastery.
Well, here some monk decided to do his own thing and paint his rooms the way he wanted.
But that thing doesn't fold anymore because the monastery is all now, all monasteries now are koinobia which means under one man, under one abbot,
common mess, common art of work, everything is common, okay?
That's one of the primary forms of monasticism.
For many years in Mount Athos various monasteries had other forms of self-government and some of them were ladre which means monks, they cook for themselves, they work for themselves and they only get together for prayer.
But this system didn't seem to work and all monasteries today in Mount Athos are coinobia.
Okay?
All but one.
Now, you see the wall that surrounds the monastery?
This is their world.
Okay, they consider this to be their microcosm and the church inside the Katholikon is to them like Noah's Ark and this is why before every service you will hear it the monks hold a big wooden piece that looks like an ore
And they hit on it.
It's a very characteristic noise.
Resembling the call that Noé made so the animals would enter the ark.
In a metaphoric sense, calling the monks to get into the Catholicon and be saved.
If you see that, you know what happened.
We come now to the Russian monastery, of course.
I beg your pardon?
It looks Russian.
Oh, yes, it does.
Yes, sir.
Thank you.
This is the Russian Monastery because you see the inverted onion domes.
This is new.
Actually, this is what?
This is modern.
Modern is what?
This is the 17, 18-century statue and expresses the desire
of the law of all Russia, especially Catherine the Great, to come down to Mediterranean.
Okay?
Huge structure, number 2,000 monks.
Wow.
There now?
No, no, in their prime time.
And it's very difficult to tell how many of them were really monks.
Now
This is aerial photography showing the monastery, the Russian monastery, from above.
This is the man-made little harbor, and this is a huge dormitory that was destroyed by fire.
Now, of course, all these things are restored, but Greek government has a problem.
because it does not want to allow too many Russians to come in does not want to allow too many Bulgarians to come in or too many Serbians to come in by the way I read something about the Serbs Yes, that's precisely what I was going to tell you and it's very difficult you know Karadzic wanted to go there the monastery and then there was a reaction from the Greek government by the Greek government now then
This is, let's go to the next.
This is Daphne.
This is the only legal port of entrance into Mount Athos.
What is this thing over here?
Daphne.
And this is what it is.
Actually, this is where you will stop, right there.
This is where you will stop.
And this is the bus you have to rush to and stand in line next to the door.
Okay?
Because too many people want to get in the bus.
You miss it?
Yes, you want to get on the bus because it's 50 minutes up the mountain to Karyas.
And if you miss the bus, don't attempt to walk it.
It's 5-6 hours.
So how many buses?
Just one?
One.
But does everybody get on?
We hope.
Well, this is the police building, this is something that has the audacity to call itself restaurant.
After all, a few days will pass.
Yes, it's what they give you and be a good man and everything is going to be.
this is where you stop and this is what we saw in the in the previous photograph and this is the area of Daphne now you take a bus and you start going up the mountain as you will see this is what you see when you approach people are waiting to be checked by
the police to get out they search you when you get out because they're afraid you might steal something and they have a reason to be afraid every now and then at Sotheby's and Tiffany's they sell things from Mount Athos okay people go there and steal but yeah so this is our athlete taking the bus yes
No, no, no.
We're still at Daphne.
We're still on the boat.
I thought you got on the bus after you got off the boat.
Yes.
But see, this is a slide that we're still on the boat.
We're still getting off.
Okay, so we haven't come to the bus yet.
No, no.
You're still on the boat.
Perhaps it would be as big as this.
This is a ferry.
Okay?
You get out and then you see these people standing there to be checked and the bus is right here.
okay the moment you walk out these are stores that sell the things that you want to take back to your friends to the way out yeah on the way out yes and the bus is right here this is a police car and then we come to the bus this is the bus this is the bus you see the exhaust is up here to make sure that the
sparks that come out don't start a fire there they put the luggage of people if you have anything heavy travel light take very few that's it don't give it step up okay what i have is one bag that's it
I've got four pairs of underwear, four shirts, four pairs of socks, a toothbrush, a razor.
That's it.
Now, on the way up, because up the mountain, you see some amazing scenery.
See how steep the coastline is and then you realize why the monks chose it.
Because they want to
Make sure that nobody bothers them.
Seclusion is the key word, okay?
And this is indeed the last refuge, the last unpolluted area in Mediterranean.
I don't say so.
The American satellites say so.
There's a mountain.
That's Atlas?
Yes.
It is huge.
You took all these pictures?
Yes.
Look at all the trees.
Look at this.
This is how they forest, they cut down trees and forest trees.
What kind of trees?
Oak, basically.
Hide wood trees?
Look how beautiful it is, huh?
Yep.
Mountain, snow.
It's amazing.
Well, from time to time, you know, the bus goes and I take photographs.
Yes.
And this is very, it struck me as very unusual.
This is granite.
The hardest thing there is.
And they shaped it into steps with chisel and hammer.
And this is miles to make access from one monastery to the other easy.
So I thought perhaps our faith is not enough to move mountains anymore.
But plenty of it to make, to shape them.
And it was monks that built all these monasteries?
Yes.
No, not actually.
Most of these monasteries were built to the help of the empire.
Expert.
Architects.
How about the workers?
Oh, well, various ways to attract workers in medieval times.
Slaves?
No, because slaves have a problem.
You need to watch over them.
And slaves don't usually produce the results you like.
There were no war prisoners either because that's the same problem.
How can one motivate?
Well, there's a way to motivate, but again it seems that most of these were built as a result of free will and money.
And money was plenty of because the emperors considered themselves obligated to donate to a monastery because they were very much concerned for afterlife.
And they thought this is a way to... So they had the full support of the modding of the powers?
Oh, definitely.
I mean, it was a totally Christian stage.
Well, the flora is also amazing there.
Will I see any this time in here?
Yes, you will, because the climate is very mild.
It's full of lemon trees and orange trees and amazing.
Gardenians, camellias, it's an amazing place.
And, well, they haven't used pesticides.
They haven't used fertilizers.
No pesticides or fertilizers.
And no wonder the flora is amazing.
In fact, now they made studies and they discovered that many hundreds of plants that are extinct in all the rest of Europe still exist in Mount Athos.
And Mount Athos is protected by various agreements and so on.
Okay, now this is Carrier.
This is the administrative center of Mount Athos.
Actually there are 20 monasteries and they send one representative every year and they all gather there and they convene in this building here, modern building and they decide
for the affairs, for their affairs.
This is a semi-autonomous system.
They can do anything they like in Mount Athos.
Mount Athos actually enjoys a different status from all other provinces in Greece.
They don't vote.
They don't pay taxes.
And they can, if they feel that are not
treated well by the Greek government, they can go to the United Nations and so on, okay?
They can.
Yes, they have different status.
In the UK, the European community also respects that status.
Okay, they allow them to maintain their way of life.
No women allowed, no visitors allowed unless they are approved and so on.
What is really important, of course, there is a Greek administrative official who attempts to allow the world to manipulate things, and very often he does.
However, monks are famous in withstanding political manipulation.
After all, Church has a huge 2,000 years experience in doing so.
And there's no wonder that they were able to survive the Turkish occupation.
Okay, the various firmaments from the Muslim, from the Ottoman sultans, that gives them privileges.
It's amazing how they can single things there.
But this is of the record now.
This is what you really want to see if you go to Kariyes.
When you go to Kariyes, this is an 11th century Trial Basilica.
And that was once again painted with frescoes in the 14th century.
But we'll get into that basilica.
See, this is called Protaton.
Protaton means where the Protos, the primus inter pares, goes to church.
The Protos is the man who was elected to run the 29th council.
He's the main man.
Okay.
The top dog, right?
And how long does he hold that position?
Year.
One year?
Yes.
This is the Protaton.
Okay?
So, where's the degree of democracy, though?
Oh, yes.
This is the Protaton.
What do you spell it?
Protaton.
P-R-O-T-A-T-O-N.
Pro-ta-ton.
He's the hare abbot.
That's the Protos.
Protaton is the church.
Protos is the hare abbot.
the climate there is very moist heavy as we call it and this is in august that's very still they use mules but again now you see many four by fours around okay jeeps run by the monks yes and this is the protatum
Well, if you go in, this is, as you enter, on the top is this fresco.
This is the mascot.
You can recognize that.
This is the reclining Christ.
By the way, a few words about the Byzantine painting.
A painter actually paints the existing doctrine.
He doesn't do anything he likes.
He paints what the church, he preaches through, with his brush.
He doesn't improvise.
No, no, no, no.
There are precisely things.
He does precisely.
Some precise things.
Is it better this way?
It doesn't matter.
OK.
Now, this is the reclining Christ, okay?
They take this from the Old Testament for the New Testament.
Now, if you go in, this is the main aisle, as you will see, to the left and the right, there are three geographical zones.
One, this is the evangelist, as you will see.
This is seen from the New Testament, this is the descent of Christ into Hades after his resurrection and liberates Adam and Eve while Saint John the Baptist who has miraculously reacquired his head is standing watching the whole process because there was a problem you realize for early Christians what happened to those righteous men who died before?
the coming of Christ, where do they go?
So Christ goes down, breaks down the walls of Hades and liberates everybody while kings, queens and other people waiting for their turn to be lifted along with Christ.
No, no, no, that's Catholic tradition.
Here's another story told, Byzantines tell stories in a film-strip fashion.
Narrative.
That's right, precisely.
And it's called by historians, by art historians, these paintings are called, the frescoes are called, they are called the Illiterate Man's Bible.
Illiterate.
Those who cannot.
Illiterate Man's Bible.
Actually, what they did was this.
They used sound and picture
to impress upon the faithful the Word of God.
And since picture was scarce, you realize that what they saw here was printed on their mind forever.
What happens here?
Here is Christ, bigger than life.
You see him?
Listening to the preaching of Saint John the Baptist.
One among the crowd, the Byzantine artist paints him a little bigger because he's a central, I think, IPKO.
Yes.
Obviously, they allow him to take photographs.
Wow, that's not easy.
Now, then you have this composition here.
Let's see what this is.
This is the moment that Christ is baptized.
He is God and He is not submerged.
He stands on the top of the water.
He is one of the few simultaneous presentations of the three entities of Holy Trinity.
Christ, the Son, the Holy Spirit as a dog and the voice of the Father
that cannot be depicted in this picture.
Well, it's depicted as a hand blessing from above.
Okay?
There's a rare presentation of three angels of Holy Trinity.
Now, angels in a position of reverence witness the miracle.
While the sea is amazed and rides away on a sea monster, so does Jordan River
presented as an old man according to the classical tradition rides away on a pair of dolphins well actually according to the script the waters of Jordan River turn the other way around and start going up the mountain when Christ stepped into the river on the river okay and the amazement of this moment is depicted thus well this is another famous scene
Christ is humiliated before Pontius Pilate, who is washing his hands, surrounded by soldiers in an official Roman building inside the city, surrounded by his accusers, and he's standing prisoner.
The central figure is Pontius Pilate.
If he steps up, he will be up to here.
14th century, painted good samples of Macedonian oil, painted by a legendary person whose name is Panselinos.
Panselinos.
That means Furbun.
Panselinos, P-A-N.
P-A-N, Selinos, S-E-L-I-N-O-S.
Yes, we're still in Protato.
Yes, this is a portrait of a king, of an emperor.
When I say king in Byzantine times, you mean an emperor.
As 14th century.
This is Ephraim the Syrian, a Syrian monk.
No wonder he is so austere looking.
This is Cyril of Alexandria, Bishop of Alexandria.
We can tell that by the cover of his head.
By the way.
The hat he wears, the culvert.
But that makes him a specific person?
Yes, because bishops don't wear things like this.
He's a known person.
We know him.
Historically, he did exist.
He's Cyril of Alexandria.
Bishop of Alexandria.
His name is Cyril.
We know that.
And he always wears this funny hood on his head.
This is a military saint.
And last, but not least, of course, is Christ here.
Look at the rosy cheek, cheeks of Christ, and he's full of life.
He's optimistic.
He's very optimistic here.
You will see different versions after the fall of Constantinople.
16th century Christ is totally different than this gentleman.
14, 14.
Macedonian school.
Look at the colors, huh?
Still surviving.
And last but not least, I think this can hold its own next to any Renaissance paintings.
St.
John the Baptist.
The man that he would feast on...
wild honey and locusts.
And do you know who did this?
Panselinos.
All of this is by one man named Panselinos.
Did you compare this as a Greek version of the Sistine Chapel in a way?
Well, no, because... Yes.
Is it the same scope and the same pattern?
No, that they express different things, but again, they aim at the same result.
They want to impress positively those who enter the chapel.
Okay?
They want to educate.
This is what it is.
Yes, precisely.
Now, this is a 16th century monastery.
It's called Stavronikita and I want you to go there.
16th century Stavronikita.
This is a post-Byzantine monastery, 16th century.
Anything after 1453
It's post-Byzantine, okay?
Anything after 1453, the fall of Constantinople, is called post-Byzantine.
And this is a post-Byzantine monastery.
And it's important for me to listen to it.
Why?
Explain.
I beg your pardon?
And why is it important for me to listen to this one?
You will see as we go on.
I will explain as we go on.
Look at these huge, massive walls.
Here they have gardens.
See the gardens?
cultivate gardens, truffles all over the place the catholicon is right in the middle and you cannot see it and of course the huge tower like any other monastery has this tower this is what it looks like from the air these are copies from somebody else's work now they restore the tower because in 1953 these are old photographs
This is the aqueduct running water into the monastery.
Is it still running water?
Oh, yes.
And if we go and see the scale... Wow!
You see how small men are?
You have your perspective.
Yes.
And these are the windows and these are the VIP rooms where me and my friends stay when I go there.
And you can hear the nightingales and the waves play all night.
It's an amazing thing.
Should I try and spend the night?
Yes, no, I would say spend the night at Iveron.
I will tell you all this.
Yes, I will.
Aquaduct.
You see it?
See the aquaduct?
And this is the reflection of the aquaduct into the... Oh, I had plenty of equipment.
Now, this is why you should visit this monastery.
This is the best samples of post-Byzantine art.
Look at Christ.
Fascimistic.
Their world has collapsed.
This is very important to me.
You can see it in the art.
They are pessimistic about the world?
Because their world has collapsed.
Their empire, which they consider the center of the world, no longer exists.
Byzantine, pious Byzantines cannot understand why God has punished them that way.
So this reflects itself in the art, in the art.
Yeah, I mean it's obvious if we put them together you can see those two things.
Right there however you see you see a Panagia, a Virgin Mary
definitely made by different artists and in fact inferior artists this is 18 probably 19th century and this is 16th century what happened actually the uh the abbot at some moment in the 19th century or late 18th century decided to redecorate plastered over plastered over and in the process saved what was underneath as a result of the earthquake
we realized that something was underneath and they cleaned the whole works so this price had been covered?
yes by this inferior art and they cleaned the top layer and voila some of the base work so why did they leave the layer again?
this was for example
So they can show... Yes, now... If this were a manuscript, we'd call this a palimpsest.
Palimpsest, yes, yes, precisely.
But there is a difference.
Pseos, in many, I scratch and... Erase.
And there was no other way to erase that.
They took a knife or a pen and they scratch it.
And then they rewrite on the top.
But they do not.
They simply cover...
And they plaster over and they paint.
And this is how we can take off the top layer.
I don't think the Christians would destroy things like this.
Okay?
Now, as you enter the monastery, you will see Christ, St.
Nicholas, and I doubt very much that you see this Virgin Mary.
I photographed this as an example of what I'm talking about.
I don't think this exists anymore.
As you enter the church, actually, this is a cliché.
Christ, Virgin Mary, and the patron saint of the church to whose name the church is dedicated.
All churches are dedicated to somebody, okay?
St.
Nicholas.
So I should definitely visit that.
That's right.
Look.
That's it, yeah, that's wonderful, isn't it?
Okay, and if you compare that to the 14th century Christ, you realize that something has happened in between.
Eviron built at sea level,
and this is a huge structure because most of the other monasteries are built on a rock for fortification purposes okay for defense purposes they are built at sea level but you see the huge walls they have and chapels incorporated in these walls this is the monastery
This is a door into which they pull the boats during winter time because the weather gets rough.
You see the small little chapels.
Huge complex.
How many people altogether on the mountain now?
About 2,000.
2,000?
Yes.
And its height it was how many people?
Oh, many.
2,000 were only at the Russian Monastery.
But there was a decline.
But it came pretty close in wiping out the population.
That was this century?
Yes, 1950.
Really, that recent?
And then it swung the other way around.
What do they attribute that to?
Sociologists say that there was, after war, there was a, in the 50s, that's the beginning of the modern times and total disorientation.
And people are looking for
points steady points of reference and this is why people go there now as you see boats don't always run on time people this is how you wait for the boat to leave yes to get out yeah i have to get out on wednesday don't worry about it i'm only joking the day you will get out on time no don't worry about it
You will speak to people, they speak English, they will explain and they are pretty reliable.
The only element that can really mess things up is the weather and that is why if you go to Lavra, make sure you don't rely on a boat to get out but on land transportation.
It's couple hours on a 4x4 and you suffer but it's well worth it.
Okay?
I'll do lava early, if I stay.
Not at the end.
No, no, no.
I'll tell you how this will work.
At the end of... Now.
This is a small man-made harbor.
And this photo was taken 20 years ago.
20, perhaps 25 years ago.
In 71.
72.
27 years ago.
Okay.
Yep.
When I was young.
Now.
This is what the monastery looks like.
It's the greatest, the biggest, built officially in 963.
Noble?
Yes.
With the donations of two great emperors, Nysephras Fokas and John Tsimiskis.
This man is no longer alive, but he brought me into a...
a point higher above, and proudly shows me his monastery.
These are the walls, fully fortified with military towers, like the ones you see at the Walls of Thessaloniki.
Okay?
This is a tower attributed to Ioannis Tsimiskis, but it's only a legend.
This is built later.
And here is the Catholicon of the monastery.
that we will visit as we go along.
It's a huge complex.
It's the biggest, earliest and number one in the list of presentation of monasteries.
Okay?
Right.
See how they use stone to cover their... This is the Catholicon.
and these are two chapels full of treasures as I will show you later actually you see a brownish color on the domes of Orthodox Greek monasteries and a greenish color on, if you remember, on the Russian that is because copper oxide is green and lead oxide is brown
Byzantines used lead and the Russians used copper to cover their domes okay this is why the different color and okay as you see many chimneys and let's go in in here this is a small chapel they share the best small icons I've seen in my life
if you can get a chance to get in how do I do this?
well attempt to to bribe them I hate to tell you this but it seems that money well give them perhaps a thousand the moment they realize that you're willing to give some money can I do this?
yes in private every time you see some of them go like this
Okay, because to indicate your respect and reverence, because this is how it is.
And when you kiss his hand, or at least pretend, give him some hand.
Okay?
No, no, no, I'm breaking down.
Nice, huh?
Now, this is their mess hall.
Okay?
They eat together.
What's really important to see is a scene of the dormition of Saint Athanasius the Athanite, who is the founder of the monastery.
Okay?
Now, this is to show you how big it is.
Now, what have we here?
Remember I told you of the monk that calls everybody into the noise ark?
See, he has a hammer, a wooden hammer, and hits this thing that looks like an oar.
And calls everybody into the monastery.
Other monks live outside of the monastery.
This is the wall of the monastery.
Other monks, this is the Catholicone of the monastery.
Other monks live outside of the monastery in caves.
Imitating people of the Old Testament, prophets of the Old Testament.
And Elijah.
They have other books.
They have, yes.
They have a stillite.
A man that lives in a pole.
okay?
and somebody is feeding him here you see faces that can be identified we know who they are present in the dormition of Saint Athanasius whose soul travels to heaven with the help of an angel and is depicted as a small baby the soul of Athanasius how would you know that?
how would a person walking in know all this?
because the man
who painted he had the list of invitations they knew who the visitors were okay so again as you say they're telling them what to express oh definitely they knew they knew this is groups of saints entering paradise royalty you see the crowns yes bishops
You see the garment.
Monks.
And last but not least, women.
Women in Byzantium, okay?
Like in any medieval society.
So they had women represented there other than the Virgin.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
But in small scale.
And that will never change with the women, right?
No.
Not in foreseeable future.
And as far as I'm concerned, that's okay with me.
That's fine, you know.
Well, this is the tree of genealogy of Christ.
Okay?
Jacob is asleep here.
King's... Detail, huh?
Virgin Mary here.
It's amazing.
You will see this in love, if you go.
You will see.
This is in the mess hall.
This is called the trapeza.
Three agiographical zones, all standing saints, martyrdom, scenes from early Christianity, heads are rolling down, people are burned alive, see heads are rolling.
And scenes from the Akathistos Hymnos on the top.
It's a light word.
Yeah, you like that, huh?
I've got to see at least one line.
Yeah, you will see.
You will.
You tell them who you are and what you are.
And I didn't bring any books because they're too heavy to carry.
No, no, no, don't.
Well, explain to them and use the persuasive power of a thousand drachmas beer.
And who do I direct this to, the individual?
To the librarian.
How do I get to find the librarian?
Oh, you ask who is the librarian.
I might even give them an American five.
I get some American.
Do they like American money?
Yeah, they like any kind of money.
And believe me, they know precisely how much they work.
But I want some fives.
Better than I do.
And for some big things.
Here, here, here.
And I get a couple of tenths.
You do what you have to do.
That's right.
You don't go there every day.
No question about it.
This is an illuminated manuscript.
This is Christ blessing the apostles in Galilee and blessing them so they would catch fish.
See how small it is.
You know, the study of these little illuminations is interesting because they deviate from the norm.
Well, they did because that's the story of all illuminators.
They had their fun.
Not only that, but they're directed to people who should not be shocked.
Here, as you will see, this is an alpha.
This is a capital alpha letter of the alphabet.
Christ and the two women that come and want to check them out.
because they see him after the resurrection.
Now, this is... Lithovolite is a martyr, the first martyr, Stephen, Stephanos, that is stoned to death by the Jews.
Among those who were stoning him was Saul.
Saint Paul later on.
There's also secular manuscripts here too, right?
No, no, no, no.
Well, a few famous ones.
A few famous ones.
Here, the Christ is... Here you have nude.
You don't see that in church, ever.
The two men possessed by demons, okay?
You know, this is in the gospel.
Beautiful, isn't it?
Yes.
The flight to Egypt.
Now, did you take these pictures?
Yes.
So they let you see the... No, I'll tell you how it's done.
See?
Christ?
with genitals amazing I've never seen a naked person this is what I'm talking about and this is why I have this because that's precisely what I'm trying to indicate I tell my audience now is this a monk trying to be cute or something?
no no no no these were given to high standing officials you know better than I do perhaps since you've done so much research in the West
how expensive these books were and how scriptoria operated this was not for every Tom, Dick and Harry this was given to bishops to high officials who could appreciate what was in it and perhaps they even directed that realism okay this went to specific audience they knew what they were doing and to whom
This book.
This is before the age of Christ.
Oh.
Hundreds of years ago.
Oh, yes.
That's 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th century.
8th century.
We have amazing.
Okay?
This is what it is.
This is the destruction of the walls of Jericho.
The trumpets.
Joshua.
Okay?
This is a scene of annunciation.
The angel, the angel calls a staff and not a lily, as the Catholics said it.
The lily is a symbol of a Catholic of Genova.
It's not the, this is the that all heralds hold in their hands when they appear to
officially.
They call Kyricion, there is a step.
This is where the angel is falling.
The feeding of the multitude.
Again in an illuminated manuscript.
In every Katholikon you will see a huge chandelier.
It's called the Chorus of the Apostles because
There are twelve, this is hidden behind a candle, there are twelve such little icons of the apostles, okay?
It's a huge, this is enamel, these are things that are amazing, pieces of oil.
Litany, for some reason or other.
perhaps because it rains too much because it doesn't rain fire pestilence Greek police of course the political authorities and a miraculous icon okay they chant at night you will see this and of course Pasolini would have a ball with his face look at this one
If that guy impresses you.
You know, these photographs are very hard to come by.
They don't like to be photographed.
They eat.
And they obey some rule of silence.
And they have one man read the script while they eat.
They don't talk.
You'll experience this because you will sit on a huge mess hall like this.
These are small bells and they're played simultaneously and they create an amazing effect.
A mechanic proudly presenting his skills.
He was Mr. Fixit in Vatopedi but he's dead now.
How do you address these monks?
My father is a priest.
You can't go wrong if you call any of these men GERONDA.
Regardless of age, because GERONDA means old man.
But regardless of age is GERONDA.
GERONDA, GERONDA, and if you see somebody you say EVLOGYTE.
EVLOGYTE.
It means bless me.
Bless us.
Please bless us.
And he would respond, the Lord.
How about this one?
This is my pride and joy.
Look at this.
That's the first thing we say?
And you call him?
If necessary to use a title or to address him.
However, is the key.
They know, then they know that you know.
I'm going to write it down.
Look at it.
That's a wonderful photograph.
That's excellent.
And I've done a lot of photography.
Look at it across the motion of the water in the background.
This is from the boat.
But it's wonderful.
This man does all this perhaps to get a bag of eggs.
Half carton of eggs, six eggs perhaps, a little coffee.
No, no, he comes to the boat, because the boat cannot go to him, the sea is very rough, to get some supplies.
Okay?
Well, this is usually the answer to people that say monasticism is usually a heaven for lazy people, for bombs and things.
This is not true.
Believe me, I've been there many, many, many times.
And the general impression is that you have to have faith.
If you don't have faith, you cannot stay there for more than 24 hours, 40 hours, 3 days, 4 days, then you go crazy.
The monotony.
The difference from everyday life.
The lack of noise.
The lack of diversity.
Unless you have a deep faith, you simply don't survive there.
You go crazy.
Perhaps divine inspiration.
Okay?
There are many desperate, destitute people that find shelter in the monasteries, like this old man, perhaps sent away by his children.
Rejected.
They go there, they work.
There is a symbiosis.
What brings young men there today?
Well, that is a sociological phenomenon.
It's amazing.
The level, the educational level of the people that go there is amazing.
Doctors, lawyers, amazing.
But they may go to state.
Yes, perhaps.
They get fed up with what is outside and they seek a better place.
Precisely, the same spirit.
that guided the early Christians to go there.
To guided what?
Early Christians to go into seclusion away from this earth, the cosmos that no longer seems to satisfy their need for virtue, for truth.
This is my favourite.
What he wears is, we call it Tsarusha.
This is what I photographed.
These are whole pieces of pig skin rolled around.
Okay?
This is as primitive as you can get.
He is Slav, perhaps a Serbian monk, because you can tell by the foot he wears.
If you see these hands, they certainly don't belong to someone who is an idol.
And the face indicates harsh life, yes.
And he's probably dead 20 years ago.
This is very early.
Fortunately, they are processed by Kodak and I have a date on every one of those.
Are they very interesting?
Yes.
In fact, since Christians in general, monks in particular, believe that our life on this earth is nothing more than a brief interval
we have to prove our worth to enter the one eternal everlasting and real life after death, they pay little attention as to how this life is spent.
This is why church rarely intervenes in affairs of state, rarely raises a voice against slavery and against oppression, because they believe that
A horse life is a better way for you to prove your worth entering paradise.
Okay?
This is their philosophy.
You can take it or leave it.
But this explains why monasteries, for example, never accepted runaway slaves.
You can be a realist or endowed
the theory, okay?
And say, well, it was good for them, they play along with the state.
However, this is what the scripture says, and this is what one is forced to explain, he must explain when he talks about these things.
And this vanity is expressed by
This painting that indicates the difficulty for anyone, and it's very popular, to enter the kingdom of heaven.
See, everybody starts... The climax, yes.
They were going up with the help of angels, but some of them are pulled down by demons.
See a demon there?
And they fall into Hades that here has the shape of a huge dragon.
few are eventually blessed to go up in the hands of Christ okay this is actually this this is what the life of the monk is all about a constant strive to go to heaven to secure a place in heaven and to indicate the vanity of all of things they freely display
In every monastery, the skulls of monks that live before them, simply to indicate that vanity, vanitatis, there is nothing.
Aren't you supposed to be buried with your whole body?
No, they don't.
They exhumed, after some years, they exhumed the body and the bones are placed in a place where bones are kept.
And they kept the stars.
Yes.
How old might some of these people be?
Oh, God.
Yes.
Only God knows.
However, since Christians are not like the other people, we should not despair.
Does everybody get to see those?
Yes, at the thought of death.
Because, you see this?
For Christians, there is hope of a resurrection.
So those novels are, that's respect.
Yes.
You had a few quotes last night that I said, remember to say them because they were so good.
We're talking about Mount Athos as a living organism.
Yes, it's a living monument.
It's a living monument of the Byzantine world, Mount Athos.
Does the Byzantine world live there in your view?
Yes, yes.
Whatever is left of it is there.
And was this a sanctuary for the Byzantine world?
Actually, the Byzantine world in 1453, all that's left standing was the institutional church which helped to take Greeks through the difficult years, 400 of them, 400 years of
The first salvation, slavery.
400 years.
It took 400 years for Greeks to liberate themselves from the Turks.
And the church was able to keep things together, to remind Greeks who were.
That was the only institution that was left standing.
And the church, but also particularly in Mount Athos, would you say?
Yes.
because Mount Athos was always the avant-garde and there was always the right wing of the church.
The church had to make... Actually they were
The church of course includes monastic movement, yes, includes the monks.
But the monks maintain some autonomy because they have three virtues not easily found in the rest of the church.
Were theoretically without property
and theoretically did not get married and were against all desires of the flesh and that puts them aside and the third pillar of which monasticism is resting is their obedience to a certain way of life and certain behavior and this obedience was usually taught to them by an older man
And thus is how the system perpetuated itself.
Orwell says in 1984, he who controls the present controls the past.
He who controls the past controls the future.
If you're going to eradicate a people, you have to eradicate their history.
Yes.
And the church did not allow that to happen.
The church played a very important role during the lean years of...
With the fall of Constantinople in 1453, was there kind of a migration?
Did refugees... No, because they did not have where to go.
They what?
They didn't have any place to go.
Refugees... Well, actually, let's put it this way.
The relations between the central government and the regions around Constantinople
were not very friendly anyway.
And the people did not really give a damn to whom they paid their taxes to.
Okay.
People with money, people who knew better, had already gone before the coming of the Muslims.
Because this empire was long gone.
In fact, the empire was basically destroyed in 1204 when it was sacked by the Crusaders.
okay this is how the story goes now anybody who had any any any money had already fled they said send their families away and those who stood and died well that's not just looking at the map yes that's an interesting map well that's that's a roman time in a that's a roman world from an empire what accounts for this
It wasn't just the preservation of faith and religion.
What accounts for all of the preservation of the art and the production of the icons and the music?
Because that was a popular item.
And that was a part of the practicing religion.
And because the Turks... Popular in what respect?
Because everybody wanted to have one.
You mean they did it for commercial purposes?
Of course they did.
The monks did.
Yes.
Don't forget that in the Creed,
the 16th century paintings, they're a Cretan art, and they're expressed basically, this trend was expressed by, it was originated and made popular by a man called Theophanes.
And later on, here they painted for two customers, the traditional, for the enslaved Byzantine world, and some of them were painted
for the Italians in maniera greca.
Okay?
They painted different things for the Italians and the West.
But these are the monks.
So they were being spiritual on the one hand.
And not only.
But actual prudors and men.
Well, listen.
You have to do something to keep body and soul together.
And this is what they did.
Again, how many of them really believed and how many did not.
It's a matter of discussion.
But again, what is there a way to tell a believer?
And you've been going, you said, since 1967?
You have been going?
67.
And why did you make the first trip?
Because I was in Greece and I was advised that I should go to Mount Athos.
I know Byzantine music and I can chant in the church.
I was always going to church and in the United States I made my good living by chanting in the church.
I made good money.
When in the supermarket I was a dollar and I was getting a dollar and a quarter an hour in the early sixties.
In church I could make five or ten dollars in one morning if I would send in a wedding and baptism.
Okay?
And I was associated and of course when I went to go to my house to take some pictures.
And that did it.
And I don't... But what did it?
You said what struck you?
Oh, everything.
The whole experience.
God.
Everything.
This is an amazing experience.
Provide, of course, that you have the background for it, okay?
If you get somebody from Tanganyika or Timbuktu, I don't know.
But anyone that is associated with Western civilization is amazed.
And wants to go back.
Oh, yes.
Well, I'll tell you this much.
I believe that what we have in Mount Athos is no longer Greek heritage.
In fact, it is
belongs to the Western Civilization.
That's a great quote.
That's at 1965.
Do that again?
Well, actually, I believe that what treasures are still in Mount Athos and don't belong to Greeks or to Orthodoxy alone.
They are the heritage, in fact, of Western Civilization, and I hope Western Civilization appreciates that and protects them as they have done in the past.
You know, there's a fellow named Robert Curzon, have you ever heard of him?
Yes.
And I've read his book, and he describes going there, and he makes fun of them, the smell of the garlic, to get in there, he eats garlic.
My friend, as I said... And he steals things, or he bribes them.
Of course he does.
And he takes them to England.
Yes.
And he's bragging in this book about how he got these things.
Yes, yes, yes.
Well, no wonder monks are so...
Apprehensive?
Apprehensive, so... Anxious?
Protective?
Yes, protective.
Suspicious?
Oh, wow.
All those words.
This is the word I was looking for.
Overly suspicious.
And they had every right to believe me.
Pages with illuminated mind scripts were simply cut off and rolled up and taken away.
Amazing.
No wonder they won't let you touch anything.
And I understand that fully.
And I understand now that even if somebody is working in the library, there has to be two monks.
Yes, but again, if they don't trust you.
In fact, I was able to go there and photograph almost anything I like, as you did see.
But it took me years.
And of course, I would satisfy their requests, like bringing things like fresh coffee or perhaps a book or whatever they wanted.
Okay, books, binoculars, but this is of the record.
I don't understand why they need binoculars so much, but they can.
Well, see, my motto is this.
If anyone says anything bad about Marotathos, I say, well, the God of the Old Testament did not destroy Nineveh, because there was one righteous man there.
Oh yeah, well, I'll be the last one to
If you look at the map of the world and Europe, Mount Athos is just a little finger.
Oh yes, a little nothing there.
Just a little finger and they mind their own business.
And if you don't like what they're doing... It's a big world!
Don't you know that one of the worst attributes of man's character, the soul of man is precisely that.
to be attracted by the difference and try to either incorporate or destroy it i mean i think that's one of the negative attributes of western civilization i mean we have an amazing it's it's almost a mania would you agree with the expression that this is kind of a time capsule yes this is uh well put and in fact i think that's the only way i believe that if you go to mount atos in fact you step back into the past provided once again
that you have the sensors to appreciate what is offered.
If you cannot see, you cannot appreciate a painting, if you cannot smell, if you cannot hear, if you cannot taste, here there is an extra sensory thing, a perception that goes beyond the senses.
And I think this is directly, it appeals directly to your soul.
This is how it's done.
You let your soul appreciate Mount Athos.
Don't try to scrutinize through logic.
This is not what Christianity is all about.
We're doing very well here.
I'm sorry, I had a thought there and I lost it.
It happens.
This thing about the women, want to just make a statement on that?
Definitely.
Well, actually, there are different ways to look at it.
The modern and temporary way.
Of course, women are a temptation, there's no question about it.
The great... But is that why they are prohibited?
Because they're a temptation?
Well, I'll tell you.
Basically, the basic thought
fathers that helped shape monasticism as Basil the Great earlier times and Theodor of Studium the Studite in the ninth century believed that by bringing women or female animals into Mount Athos actually you recreate a microcosm similar to
to the world you left behind.
Because you import, you bring along that which the Greeks called or everyday life tasks and things to do.
You bring the problems of every life
every life problems, everyday life problems.
You recreate family, you recreate problems, you recreate the needs away from which you run in order to devote yourself to God.
What they want to do is this.
On one to one basis attempt to rise in a higher sphere.
and be able to get close to Divinity before they die.
Cleanse their soul, purify their soul.
That you cannot do if you have next to you a source of carnal temptation.
Because basic pillar upon which monasticism is based is the virginity of the body and the soul.
And mortification of the desires of the flesh.
Okay?
That is true.
to Orthodox monasticism and to Western monasticism as well.
Orthodox kept it more and better because here the Empire has an Emperor that would keep your behind.
Okay?
The law stands in the West.
The Church and the Papacy is the law.
No wonder the clergy in the West has problems like we all know.
The Popes.
We never had a
a patriarch similar to Alexander Borges, to say the least.
Just to give you one example.
Scandals of that type, sexual scandals are unknown to the Byzantine Church.
Unknown?
Unknown.
To the Byzantine higher clergy.
Okay.
How about among the monks?
Among the monks, there are, well, quite a few things, but are you sure you want to get into the subject?
No.
That's just a question that has no... Of the record.
No, no, no, no.
I trust you.
If I didn't trust you, I wouldn't talk to you.
I don't know how good a man I am, how good a judge I am of human character, but I think I know enough.
But we're mortal.
No, I know.
of men, I know of people, to appreciate.
I mean, I can... Let's not waste that time on it.
That's right.
Now, listen, what I'm trying to say is this.
In the back, there is an etypicon for every monastery, the founding...